Well, the debugger is a tool not only for
setting breakpoints and inspecting values of variables.
Depending on your development environment,
you will most probably have a debug of some kind on your system already.
In this course, we will be using the GNU Debugger or GDB for short.
It is a command line-based tool,
so we don't have a nice fancy GUI to display
information but there are lots of details we can get from GDB.
In this example, we will be using it to look directly into the computer memory,
into memory blocks to which the character pointer
in the code example you already saw refers.
We will try to locate the string UDACITY there
directly from the hex and binary values using an ASCII table.
So let's go and see how it works.
So now let's take a look at how the debugger works here.
In this case, we're going to use the GDB debugger.
In order to start GDB,
we simply type GDB on the console and then we have to
provide the location of the executable we want to debug.
In my case, this lives in the directory bin and the program is called example.
This is how we start up the debugger.
For the example code,
we can see in the upper left corner here.
We have a main function. Inside the main function,
we have a string which gets assigned UDACITY.
So we can locate this string in memory shortly.
Then after the string has been written into memory,
we are printing it to the console and then finally the function returns.
So let's fire up this program or fire up GDB using this program.
This is the info you get when you start GDB.
It has been configured to run on my machine which is an Apple,
iMac 64-bit which you can find here.
On the bottom, in green,
you can see that the GNU debugger has been reading some symbols.
The symbols it has been reading is the source code which comes along with the program.
So we have the binary and we have the source code available to the debugger now.
We can simply print these source codes to the debugging console by typing list.
As you can see here we have the same program on the bottom than we have on the top.
In order to halt the execution at a certain point,
we can add a breakpoint.
In case you might have been wondering what
the PDF document on the right-hand side here is,
it's actually my GDB cheat sheet,
which is quite useful because it contains
the most common commands which you might want to use when running GDB.
Now when you want to set a break point,
we can also look this up here.
So if you look in the breakpoints section here on the left-hand side,
break is the command to set a breakpoint and where is
the location of the line in which we want to set the breakpoint.
We can also delete all the breakpoints we have set,
we can enable and disable a certain breakpoint,
and we can also remove one break point.
Now let's set our break point in line number
5 which is before the string here is written into memory.
Okay. So that's enter break 5. Here we go.
Now we have a break point at this memory address.
If we think of the C plus plus process model,
we know that the commands which are shipped with
a program binary are also located inside memory.
This is the address at which this certain breakpoint lives which
corresponds to line number 5 where the string UDACITY is written to memory.
Now in order to halt the execution at this point,
we have to actually run the program which can be simply done by typing run.
Now we have some warnings here which we're going to ignore for now.
But what we want to look at is this particular code at the bottom.
So we have hit Breakpoint 1 in main at line number 5.
This is the line which is about to be executed.
Now, what do we want to do in the next part of this short tutorial here,
we want to find the location of this string and memory.
In order for this to work,
we of course need to execute this line first.
This can be done very simply by calling the step command and by calling step,
we are simply moving on to the next line.
Now line 5 has been executed and the string lives inside memory.
We can simply print the variable by typing p,
and then the variable name which is str1.
By doing so, we get to the content of this character array which contains UDACITY.
We can also print the address of the array by typing p and present str1.
Now we get the location in memory where the first character is located.
Moving on what from here,
the other characters, the U, the D,
the A, and so on and so forth are located in memory.